Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: the immune system.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us begin. Give me an overview of the immune system and why it concerns the
anaesthetist.
The immune system is the body's defence against infection and against abnormal
cells such as tumours, and it is conventionally divided into two arms that work
together.
Innate immunity is the rapid, non-specific first line — physical barriers,
phagocytic cells, the complement system and inflammation — present from birth,
acting within minutes to hours, with no memory.
Adaptive immunity is the slower, antigen-specific response mounted by lymphocytes,
which takes days to develop on first exposure but generates exquisite specificity
and lasting immunological memory, so that subsequent exposures are met faster and
more powerfully.
The two arms communicate constantly,
the innate system instructing and amplifying the adaptive response.
This concerns the anaesthetist for several reasons.
We routinely encounter the immune system's pathological extremes: anaphylaxis,
the most acute immunological emergency in our practice; sepsis,
a dysregulated immune response to infection;
and the patient with autoimmune disease, immunodeficiency or immunosuppression.
Surgery and anaesthesia themselves modulate immunity,
and transfusion has immune consequences. We give drugs — antibiotics,
neuromuscular blockers, steroids — that interact with the immune system.
So the immune system is the integrated innate and adaptive defence against
infection and abnormal cells, and it matters to us through anaphylaxis, sepsis,
the immunocompromised or autoimmune patient,
the immune effects of surgery and transfusion,
and the many immunologically active drugs we use.
Describe the components of innate immunity, beginning with the barriers.
Innate immunity provides immediate, non-specific defence,
and its first element is the set of physical and chemical barriers that keep
pathogens out.
The skin is a tough, dry, continuous physical barrier with an acidic surface and
antimicrobial peptides; the mucous membranes of the respiratory,
gastrointestinal and genitourinary tracts trap organisms in mucus,
which the ciliary escalator clears from the airway,
and bathe them in antimicrobial secretions such as lysozyme in tears and saliva and
acid in the stomach.
The normal commensal flora competes with pathogens.
These barriers are clinically relevant because we breach them constantly —
intravenous and arterial lines, urinary catheters,
tracheal tubes bypassing the airway defences,
and surgical incision — which is why asepsis and infection prevention are so
central.
Beyond the barriers, the cellular and humoral components of innate immunity act if
organisms penetrate: phagocytic cells, the complement system,
and the inflammatory response, all able to recognise broad classes of pathogen
through conserved molecular patterns without prior exposure.
The innate system also includes natural killer cells that destroy virus-infected
and tumour cells.
So innate immunity begins with the physical and chemical barriers of skin, mucosa,
secretions and commensal flora — which our interventions routinely breach — backed
by phagocytes, complement, inflammation and natural killer cells that respond
immediately to any organism that gets through.
What are the main cells of the innate immune system and their roles?
Several cell types carry out innate defence, and each has a characteristic role.
Neutrophils are the most numerous circulating white cell and the first responders
to bacterial infection: they are phagocytes that migrate rapidly from the blood to
a site of infection, engulf and kill organisms with reactive oxygen species and
enzymes, and form neutrophil extracellular traps;
they are short-lived and their dead remains form pus.
Macrophages, derived from circulating monocytes that migrate into tissues,
are longer-lived phagocytes that engulf pathogens and debris,
present antigen to the adaptive system,
and secrete cytokines that orchestrate inflammation;
the Kupffer cells of the liver and alveolar macrophages are examples.
Dendritic cells are the professional antigen-presenting cells that bridge innate
and adaptive immunity, capturing antigen and carrying it to lymph nodes to activate
T cells.
Natural killer cells are lymphocytes of the innate system that kill virus-infected
and tumour cells recognised by the loss of normal surface markers.
Mast cells and basophils contain granules of histamine and other mediators and are
central to allergic and anaphylactic reactions,
while eosinophils combat parasites and contribute to allergy.
So the innate cells are the neutrophils and macrophages as the principal
phagocytes, dendritic cells as the link to adaptive immunity,
natural killer cells against infected and tumour cells, and mast cells,
basophils and eosinophils mediating allergy and antiparasite defence — together the
cellular arm of immediate immunity.
Explain the complement system.
The complement system is a cascade of plasma proteins, made largely by the liver,
that forms a key humoral component of innate immunity,
amplifying the response to infection and linking it to adaptive immunity.
The proteins circulate as inactive precursors and are activated in sequence,
each cleaving the next, by any of three pathways that converge on a common point.
The classical pathway is triggered by antibody bound to antigen,
linking complement to the adaptive response.
The alternative pathway is triggered directly by microbial surfaces,
part of innate immunity. The lectin pathway is triggered by mannose-binding lectin
recognising sugars on pathogens.
All three converge on the cleavage of the central component C3,
generating fragments that carry out complement's main functions.
These functions are threefold. Opsonisation:
fragments such as C3b coat the pathogen, marking it for phagocytosis.
Chemotaxis and inflammation: small fragments, the anaphylatoxins C3a and C5a,
recruit and activate inflammatory cells and cause mast-cell degranulation and
increased vascular permeability.
And direct lysis: the terminal components assemble into the membrane attack
complex, which punches pores in the pathogen membrane to kill it.
Complement is tightly regulated to prevent host damage,
and its deficiency or dysregulation causes disease — recurrent infection, or,
when uncontrolled, conditions such as hereditary angioedema and the contribution to
anaphylaxis and to the inflammation of sepsis.
So complement is a self-amplifying plasma cascade,
triggered by three pathways converging on C3, that opsonises,
inflames and lyses pathogens, bridging innate and adaptive immunity.
Describe the acute inflammatory response.
Acute inflammation is the immediate,
stereotyped tissue response to injury or infection,
designed to deliver defensive cells and proteins to the site and to begin repair,
and it produces the classical signs of redness, heat, swelling,
pain and loss of function.
It begins when tissue damage or pathogen recognition activates resident cells —
macrophages and mast cells — to release inflammatory mediators.
These mediators produce the vascular and cellular changes that define inflammation.
The vascular changes are vasodilatation,
increasing blood flow and causing the redness and heat,
and increased vascular permeability,
allowing protein-rich fluid to leak into the tissues as the exudate that causes
swelling and delivers antibody and complement.
The cellular changes are the recruitment of leucocytes, chiefly neutrophils,
which marginate, adhere to the activated endothelium,
migrate through the vessel wall and move up chemotactic gradients to the site,
where they phagocytose pathogens.
The mediators involved are numerous:
histamine and serotonin from mast cells for the early vascular response;
the eicosanoids — prostaglandins and leukotrienes — from arachidonic acid;
the kinins such as bradykinin; cytokines such as tumour necrosis factor and the
interleukins; and complement fragments.
Pain arises from mediators sensitising nociceptors.
The response is normally self-limiting and resolves,
but if dysregulated or systemic it underlies much disease.
So acute inflammation is the mediator-driven vascular dilatation and leak plus
leucocyte recruitment that delivers defence to injured or infected tissue,
producing the cardinal signs, and it is the local expression of innate immunity —
and the target of our anti-inflammatory drugs.
How does the innate system recognise pathogens?
The innate immune system recognises pathogens without the specific,
learned receptors of the adaptive system,
instead detecting conserved molecular signatures through a set of germline-encoded
pattern-recognition receptors, a strategy that allows immediate broad-spectrum
defence.
The targets are of two kinds.
Pathogen-associated molecular patterns are molecules characteristic of broad
classes of microbe but absent from the host — bacterial lipopolysaccharide,
or endotoxin, from Gram-negative cell walls; peptidoglycan; bacterial flagellin;
and viral and bacterial nucleic acid motifs.
Damage-associated molecular patterns are molecules released from the host's own
damaged or dying cells — such as nuclear and mitochondrial components — which
signal tissue injury even without infection,
and which are important in the sterile inflammation of trauma and surgery.
These patterns are detected by pattern-recognition receptors,
the best known being the Toll-like receptors on and within immune cells,
with others such as the cytoplasmic NOD-like receptors that form inflammasomes.
Engagement of these receptors activates the cell,
triggering the release of inflammatory cytokines and the recruitment of the
defensive response, and instructing the adaptive system.
The recognition of endotoxin through Toll-like receptor four is central to the
pathophysiology of Gram-negative sepsis.
So the innate system recognises broad pathogen- and damage-associated molecular
patterns through germline-encoded pattern-recognition receptors such as the
Toll-like receptors, allowing immediate response to infection and to tissue injury
— the latter explaining the inflammation provoked by trauma and surgery themselves.
Now adaptive immunity. Give me its overview.
Adaptive immunity is the antigen-specific arm of the immune system,
mounted by lymphocytes, which provides the precise,
powerful and lasting defence that the innate system cannot,
at the cost of taking days to develop on first encounter.
Its defining features are specificity, diversity and memory.
Specificity: each lymphocyte bears a receptor for one particular antigen,
so the response is tailored to the specific invader.
Diversity: through genetic rearrangement,
the body generates an enormous repertoire of lymphocyte receptors,
able to recognise almost any antigen it might meet.
Memory: after an infection, long-lived memory lymphocytes persist,
so a second encounter with the same antigen provokes a faster,
larger response — the basis of lasting immunity and of vaccination.
Adaptive immunity has two limbs.
Cell-mediated immunity is carried out by T lymphocytes and deals chiefly with
intracellular pathogens such as viruses and with abnormal cells.
Humoral immunity is carried out by B lymphocytes,
which produce antibody to deal with extracellular pathogens and toxins.
The adaptive response is initiated when antigen-presenting cells of the innate
system present captured antigen to T cells, so the two systems are interdependent.
Self-tolerance, the failure to react against the body's own tissues, is built in,
and its breakdown causes autoimmunity.
So adaptive immunity is the specific,
diverse and memory-bearing lymphocyte response,
comprising T-cell-mediated and B-cell-mediated antibody immunity,
initiated by innate antigen presentation,
providing the precise and durable defence that underlies recovery from infection
and the success of vaccination.
Explain antigen presentation and the role of the major histocompatibility complex.
T lymphocytes cannot recognise free antigen;
they recognise fragments of antigen displayed on cell surfaces by specialised
molecules, and this presentation, through the major histocompatibility complex,
is central to adaptive immunity and to transplantation.
The major histocompatibility complex,
known in humans as the human leucocyte antigen system,
is a set of highly polymorphic cell-surface glycoproteins that bind peptide
fragments and display them to T cells. There are two classes.
Class one molecules are present on almost all nucleated cells and display peptides
from within the cell — from the cytoplasm — so that a cell infected by a virus,
or a tumour cell making abnormal proteins, presents these to cytotoxic T cells,
which then kill it; this is how the immune system surveys the inside of every cell.
Class two molecules are present only on professional antigen-presenting cells —
dendritic cells, macrophages and B cells — and display peptides taken up from
outside the cell, presenting them to helper T cells to orchestrate the response.
The enormous polymorphism of the human leucocyte antigen system,
varying between individuals, is what makes tissue typing necessary in
transplantation, since foreign human-leucocyte-antigen molecules provoke rejection,
and it underlies the antibody-mediated transfusion reactions and disease
associations.
So antigen presentation is the display of peptide fragments by
major-histocompatibility-complex molecules — class one on all cells to cytotoxic T
cells, class two on antigen-presenting cells to helper T cells — the mechanism by
which T cells survey for infected, abnormal and foreign material,
and the basis of transplant matching.
Describe the types and functions of T lymphocytes.
T lymphocytes, which mature in the thymus,
are the cells of cell-mediated immunity and the orchestrators of the whole adaptive
response, and they fall into several functional subsets distinguished by their
surface markers and roles.
Helper T cells, bearing the CD4 marker, are the central coordinators:
activated by antigen presented on class-two major-histocompatibility-complex
molecules, they secrete cytokines that direct and amplify almost every other arm of
the response — helping B cells make antibody,
activating macrophages and cytotoxic cells, and recruiting inflammation.
They differentiate into subsets tailored to different threats.
Cytotoxic T cells, bearing the CD8 marker,
are the killers of cell-mediated immunity:
recognising abnormal peptide on class-one major-histocompatibility-complex
molecules, they destroy virus-infected and tumour cells directly by inducing
apoptosis.
Regulatory T cells suppress and restrain the immune response,
maintaining self-tolerance and preventing excessive or autoimmune reactions.
Memory T cells persist after infection to provide a rapid response on re-exposure.
The central importance of the CD4 helper cell is shown by the human
immunodeficiency virus, which destroys it and so collapses the whole adaptive
response, causing acquired immunodeficiency.
So T lymphocytes comprise CD4 helper cells that coordinate the response,
CD8 cytotoxic cells that kill infected and abnormal cells,
regulatory cells that restrain and tolerise,
and memory cells — with the helper cell the linchpin whose loss in human
immunodeficiency virus infection devastates immunity.
Describe B lymphocytes and antibody.
B lymphocytes, which mature in the bone marrow, are the cells of humoral immunity,
and their function is to produce antibody,
the soluble protein that defends against extracellular pathogens and toxins.
Each B cell bears a unique surface antibody acting as its antigen receptor.
When a B cell encounters its specific antigen,
usually with help from a helper T cell and its cytokines, it is activated,
proliferates and differentiates into plasma cells,
which are antibody factories secreting large quantities of antibody of that single
specificity, and into memory B cells that persist for a rapid future response.
Antibody, or immunoglobulin, is a Y-shaped glycoprotein with two identical
antigen-binding sites at the tips of the variable regions,
which confer specificity, and a constant region, the stem,
which determines the antibody's class and effector functions.
Antibody defends in several ways: neutralisation,
binding and blocking toxins and viruses; opsonisation,
coating pathogens to promote their phagocytosis;
activation of the classical complement pathway; and, by coating cells,
triggering their destruction by natural killer cells in antibody-dependent cellular
cytotoxicity.
The first antibody made in a response is immunoglobulin M,
switching later to immunoglobulin G and others.
So B lymphocytes, activated by antigen and helper-T-cell help,
differentiate into plasma cells that secrete antibody and memory cells;
antibody neutralises, opsonises, fixes complement and arms cytotoxic cells — the
soluble, specific weapon of humoral immunity against extracellular threats.
Outline the classes of antibody and their particular functions.
There are five classes of immunoglobulin,
distinguished by the constant region of their heavy chains,
each with characteristic properties and roles,
and the anaesthetist meets several of them in clinically important contexts.
Immunoglobulin G is the most abundant in serum,
the principal antibody of the secondary response and of long-term immunity;
it neutralises, opsonises and fixes complement,
and crucially it is the only class that crosses the placenta,
providing passive immunity to the newborn — and underlying haemolytic disease of
the newborn and the immune blood-group antibodies.
Immunoglobulin M is the largest, a pentamer,
the first antibody produced in a primary response;
it is a highly efficient agglutinator and complement activator,
and it is the class of the naturally occurring ABO blood-group antibodies.
Immunoglobulin A is the antibody of mucosal secretions — saliva, tears,
gut and respiratory secretions, and breast milk — defending the mucosal surfaces;
deficiency of it is relevant to anaphylactic transfusion reactions.
Immunoglobulin E is present in tiny amounts but is central to allergy and
anaphylaxis and to antiparasite defence: it binds mast cells and basophils,
and cross-linking of bound immunoglobulin E by allergen triggers their
degranulation.
Immunoglobulin D is found on B-cell surfaces with a less defined role.
So the classes are immunoglobulin G for systemic and placental immunity,
immunoglobulin M for the primary response and ABO antibodies,
immunoglobulin A for mucosal defence, immunoglobulin E for allergy and anaphylaxis,
and immunoglobulin D — each class matched to its function,
and several directly relevant to transfusion and to allergic reactions.
Contrast the primary and secondary immune responses, and relate this to vaccination.
The primary and secondary immune responses differ in speed, magnitude and quality,
and the difference is the basis of immunological memory and of vaccination.
The primary response is mounted on first encounter with an antigen.
It has a lag phase of several days while the few lymphocytes specific for that
antigen are activated, proliferate and differentiate;
the antibody produced is initially immunoglobulin M, of modest amount and affinity,
later switching to immunoglobulin G.
During this response, long-lived memory B and T cells are generated and persist.
The secondary response occurs on a later encounter with the same antigen.
Because of the expanded pool of high-affinity memory cells,
it is far faster — antibody rises within a day or two — far larger,
and of higher quality, predominantly high-affinity immunoglobulin G.
This rapid, powerful secondary response usually eliminates the pathogen before it
causes disease, which is what we mean by being immune.
Vaccination exploits this directly:
it deliberately exposes the immune system to a harmless form of an antigen — a
killed or attenuated organism, a subunit, a toxoid,
or the instructions to make an antigen — to provoke a primary response and
establish memory, without the danger of the natural infection,
so that on real exposure the person mounts a protective secondary response.
So the primary response is slow, modest and immunoglobulin-M-dominated while laying
down memory, the secondary response is rapid,
large and high-affinity immunoglobulin G,
and vaccination safely induces memory so that natural exposure meets a protective
secondary response.
Describe the classification of hypersensitivity reactions.
Hypersensitivity reactions are immune responses that are exaggerated or
inappropriate and cause tissue damage rather than protection,
and they are classified into four types by the Gell and Coombs scheme according to
mechanism.
Type one is immediate hypersensitivity, mediated by immunoglobulin E:
on first exposure the person is sensitised,
making immunoglobulin E that binds mast cells;
on re-exposure the allergen cross-links this immunoglobulin E,
triggering immediate mast-cell degranulation with release of histamine and other
mediators, causing allergy and, at its most severe, anaphylaxis.
Type two is antibody-mediated cytotoxic hypersensitivity,
in which immunoglobulin G or M antibody binds to antigen on a cell surface,
leading to the cell's destruction by complement or phagocytosis — as in haemolytic
transfusion reactions, haemolytic disease of the newborn,
and autoimmune haemolytic anaemia.
Type three is immune-complex mediated:
antigen–antibody complexes are deposited in tissues and activate complement,
causing inflammation, as in serum sickness and some vasculitides.
Type four is delayed, cell-mediated hypersensitivity,
mediated not by antibody but by T cells,
developing over a day or two — as in the tuberculin test, contact dermatitis,
and some delayed drug reactions.
So the four types are immunoglobulin-E-mediated immediate allergy and anaphylaxis,
antibody-mediated cytotoxicity, immune-complex disease,
and T-cell-mediated delayed hypersensitivity — a framework that classifies the
allergic and immune reactions, including drug reactions, that we encounter.
Anaphylaxis is the immunological emergency of our practice.
Describe its mechanism, features and management.
Anaphylaxis is a severe, life-threatening, generalised hypersensitivity reaction,
the acute immunological emergency of anaesthesia,
and it demands immediate recognition and treatment.
Its classic mechanism is type-one, immunoglobulin-E-mediated:
in a previously sensitised patient,
allergen cross-links immunoglobulin E on mast cells and basophils,
triggering massive degranulation and release of histamine, tryptase,
leukotrienes and other mediators; a clinically identical non-immune reaction,
formerly called anaphylactoid, can occur through direct mast-cell activation
without immunoglobulin E.
The released mediators produce the features:
cardiovascular collapse from vasodilatation and capillary leak causing profound
hypotension and tachycardia, often the dominant sign under anaesthesia;
bronchospasm and airway oedema causing hypoxia and difficulty ventilating; and,
when visible, urticaria, flushing and angioedema,
though cutaneous signs may be absent or unseen under drapes.
Under anaesthesia it often presents as sudden unexplained hypotension,
rising airway pressure and desaturation.
Management is by a clear, immediate algorithm: remove the likely trigger,
call for help, secure the airway and give one hundred per cent oxygen,
and — the key drug — give adrenaline, intramuscularly or,
in the cannulated anaesthetised patient with cardiovascular collapse,
in titrated intravenous boluses; give intravenous fluid generously for the
vasodilatation and leak; and use adjuncts such as antihistamines,
steroids and bronchodilators.
Mast-cell tryptase should be sampled at intervals to confirm the diagnosis,
and the patient referred for allergy testing to identify the culprit.
So anaphylaxis is massive mediator release causing cardiovascular collapse,
bronchospasm and angioedema, presenting under anaesthesia as sudden hypotension and
high airway pressures, and treated immediately with adrenaline, oxygen and fluids,
with tryptase and later allergy testing to secure the diagnosis.
What are the common triggers of perioperative anaphylaxis and how is the culprit
identified?
Perioperative anaphylaxis has a characteristic set of triggers,
and identifying the culprit is essential to protect the patient from a future,
possibly fatal, re-exposure.
The leading causes, varying somewhat between countries,
are the neuromuscular blocking drugs,
which are among the commonest triggers in many series and which can cross-react
with one another and with other quaternary-ammonium compounds; antibiotics,
particularly the beta-lactams such as penicillins and cephalosporins,
now a leading cause as their use at induction has grown; and chlorhexidine,
an increasingly recognised and easily overlooked trigger present on skin
preparations, coated central lines and lubricants.
Other causes include latex, historically important and now reduced by latex-free
practice but still relevant; the intravenous induction agents and colloids;
blue dyes used in surgery; and, less commonly, opioids and other agents.
The timing offers a clue — reactions to intravenous drugs given at induction occur
within minutes, while latex and chlorhexidine reactions may be delayed.
Identification has two stages: at the time,
mast-cell tryptase is measured in timed samples,
a rise confirming mast-cell degranulation and so anaphylaxis; and later,
the patient is referred to a specialist allergy clinic for skin-prick,
intradermal and where available specific-immunoglobulin-E testing against the drugs
used, to identify the responsible agent and safe alternatives,
and is given clear documentation and warning.
So the common perioperative triggers are neuromuscular blockers,
antibiotics and chlorhexidine, with latex and others,
and the culprit is identified by acute tryptase measurement and subsequent
specialist allergy testing, which is a mandatory part of management.
How do surgery and critical illness affect the immune system?
Surgery and critical illness provoke a complex,
biphasic immune response that is part of the stress response and that has important
consequences for infection and recovery.
The initial phase is a systemic inflammatory response:
tissue injury releases damage-associated molecular patterns and activates the
innate system, releasing pro-inflammatory cytokines such as tumour necrosis factor
and the interleukins, producing the systemic inflammatory response syndrome with
fever, tachycardia and the acute-phase reaction.
This is appropriate in proportion but harmful in excess,
and a sufficiently large insult — major surgery, trauma,
sepsis — can produce an overwhelming,
dysregulated inflammatory response that damages the host's own tissues and
contributes to organ dysfunction.
Following or accompanying this is a compensatory anti-inflammatory phase,
in which the immune system is down-regulated and the patient becomes relatively
immunosuppressed, more susceptible to secondary and nosocomial infection — a state
of immune exhaustion seen in prolonged critical illness.
Anaesthesia and analgesia modulate this:
the stress response and its immune effects are attenuated by good analgesia,
particularly regional techniques, and some agents have direct immunomodulatory
effects. Transfusion adds its own immunomodulation.
There is even interest in whether anaesthetic technique influences cancer
recurrence through these immune effects, though this remains unproven.
So surgery and critical illness drive an initial pro-inflammatory response that can
become a damaging dysregulated systemic reaction,
followed by a compensatory immunosuppressed phase predisposing to infection,
and this response is modulated by analgesia, anaesthetic technique and transfusion.
Tell me about immunodeficiency, both primary and acquired.
Immunodeficiency is a failure of one or more components of the immune system,
leaving the patient prone to infection, and it may be primary, that is congenital,
or acquired, the latter being far commoner and frequently encountered
perioperatively.
Primary immunodeficiencies are inherited defects of specific components — antibody
deficiencies such as common variable immunodeficiency or selective immunoglobulin-A
deficiency, T-cell or combined defects, phagocyte disorders,
and complement deficiencies — each predisposing to characteristic infections;
though individually rare, they require specific precautions,
and immunoglobulin-A deficiency is relevant to anaphylactic transfusion reactions.
Acquired immunodeficiency is much more common and has many causes.
Infection with the human immunodeficiency virus destroys CD4 helper T cells and
progressively collapses adaptive immunity,
causing the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome with opportunistic infection.
Drug-induced immunosuppression is widespread: corticosteroids,
cytotoxic chemotherapy, and the immunosuppressants given to transplant recipients
and for autoimmune disease all impair immunity.
Other causes include malignancy, particularly of the bone marrow and lymphoid
system, malnutrition, diabetes, the extremes of age,
and the immunosuppression of critical illness and major surgery.
The perioperative implications are heightened infection risk demanding scrupulous
asepsis, an often blunted or atypical response to infection,
possible need for prophylaxis, and careful management of immunosuppressive
medication.
So immunodeficiency is primary, from inherited defects, or, far more often,
acquired — from human immunodeficiency virus, immunosuppressive drugs,
malignancy and many other causes — and it raises infection risk and demands
asepsis, vigilance and careful drug management around surgery.
What should the anaesthetist know about immunosuppressive drugs and the transplant
patient?
The immunosuppressed transplant patient is increasingly common,
and the anaesthetist must understand both the drugs that keep the graft and the
consequences of long-term immunosuppression.
Transplant immunosuppression typically combines agents acting at different points:
calcineurin inhibitors such as ciclosporin and tacrolimus,
which block T-cell activation and are nephrotoxic and interact with many drugs;
antiproliferative agents such as mycophenolate and azathioprine; corticosteroids;
and others such as the mammalian-target-of-rapamycin inhibitors.
These drugs have important perioperative implications.
They must generally be continued through the perioperative period to prevent
rejection, with attention to the route if the patient cannot take oral medication,
and they have specific toxicities — nephrotoxicity, hypertension, diabetes,
marrow suppression and electrolyte disturbance — and numerous drug interactions.
The long-term immunosuppression predisposes to infection,
demanding scrupulous asepsis and a low threshold for investigating sepsis,
and to certain malignancies.
The transplanted organ itself has altered physiology — for example the denervated
transplanted heart, which does not respond to vagal or direct autonomic manoeuvres
and relies on circulating catecholamines and directly acting drugs.
Patients on chronic corticosteroids may need perioperative supplementation to cover
the stress response if their adrenal axis is suppressed.
So the transplant patient's immunosuppression should be continued perioperatively
despite its toxicities and interactions,
asepsis and infection vigilance are paramount,
the transplanted organ may have altered physiology,
and steroid-dependent patients may need stress-dose cover.
Comment on autoimmune disease as it concerns anaesthesia.
Autoimmune diseases arise when self-tolerance fails and the immune system attacks
the body's own tissues, and several are important to the anaesthetist both for
their organ effects and for their treatment.
The mechanisms include autoantibodies and autoreactive T cells,
and the diseases may be organ-specific or systemic.
Several have direct anaesthetic relevance.
Myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune disease in which antibodies against the
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor at the neuromuscular junction cause fatigable
weakness, profoundly altering the response to neuromuscular blocking drugs —
resistance to suxamethonium and marked sensitivity to non-depolarising agents — and
risking respiratory failure.
Rheumatoid arthritis affects the airway through cricoarytenoid joint involvement
and atlanto-axial instability of the cervical spine,
a serious airway and positioning hazard,
as well as causing systemic and drug effects.
Systemic lupus erythematosus causes multi-organ involvement — renal, cardiac,
haematological and a prothrombotic antiphospholipid tendency.
Many of these patients take immunosuppressants and long-term steroids,
with the implications already discussed,
including possible need for stress-dose cover and infection risk.
Autoimmune thyroid and adrenal disease alter endocrine physiology.
So autoimmune diseases concern us through their specific organ effects — the
neuromuscular-junction antibodies of myasthenia altering relaxant response,
the airway and spine of rheumatoid disease,
the multisystem and prothrombotic features of lupus — and through their
immunosuppressive treatment, all of which require specific assessment and planning.
How does the immune system feature in sepsis?
Sepsis is, at its core, a disorder of the immune response,
now defined as life-threatening organ dysfunction caused by a dysregulated host
response to infection, and understanding the immunology clarifies both its features
and its management.
When the innate immune system recognises a pathogen — for instance endotoxin from
Gram-negative bacteria binding Toll-like receptor four — it mounts an inflammatory
response that is normally local and controlled.
In sepsis this response becomes systemic and dysregulated:
a massive release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, sometimes called a cytokine storm,
causes widespread endothelial activation, vasodilatation and capillary leak,
producing the distributive shock, the hypotension and the tissue oedema of sepsis;
activation of coagulation causes the microvascular thrombosis of disseminated
intravascular coagulation; and the combination impairs oxygen delivery and
utilisation, causing the organ dysfunction that defines the syndrome.
The response is not purely pro-inflammatory:
a concurrent and later compensatory immunosuppression leaves the patient vulnerable
to secondary infection, and prolonged sepsis is marked by this immune exhaustion.
Management, framed by the Surviving Sepsis Campaign, is early recognition,
prompt source control and antibiotics to remove the trigger,
and supportive resuscitation — fluids and vasopressors for the distributive shock
and organ support — while attempts to modulate the immune response directly have
largely disappointed.
So sepsis is a dysregulated, initially hyperinflammatory and later immunosuppressed
host response to infection, producing distributive shock,
coagulopathy and organ dysfunction, and managed by source control,
antibiotics and supportive resuscitation rather than by immune modulation.
Finally, draw together the anaesthetic relevance of the immune system.
Drawing the station together, the immune system,
with its rapid innate arm and its specific, memory-bearing adaptive arm,
is woven through anaesthetic and critical-care practice,
and a few unifying themes connect its many points of contact.
We constantly breach the innate barriers — with lines,
tubes and incisions — which is why asepsis and infection prevention are fundamental.
We face the immune system's most acute emergency in anaphylaxis,
an immunoglobulin-E-mediated or direct mast-cell catastrophe presenting as sudden
hypotension, bronchospasm and high airway pressures,
treated immediately with adrenaline,
oxygen and fluids and investigated with tryptase and allergy testing,
with neuromuscular blockers, antibiotics and chlorhexidine the leading triggers.
We manage the immunocompromised — the patient with human immunodeficiency virus,
the transplant recipient on immunosuppressants,
the patient on chemotherapy or steroids — with heightened infection vigilance,
careful continuation of their drugs,
and attention to altered organ physiology and possible steroid cover.
We deal with autoimmune diseases whose specific features,
such as the altered relaxant response of myasthenia and the airway of rheumatoid
disease, change our conduct.
And we treat sepsis, a dysregulated immune response causing distributive shock and
organ failure, with source control, antibiotics and resuscitation,
while recognising that surgery and transfusion themselves modulate immunity.
So the immune system underlies infection risk, anaphylaxis,
the care of the immunocompromised and autoimmune patient,
and sepsis — a thread of immunology running through the whole of our practice.
Distinguish active from passive immunity, and where does immunoglobulin therapy fit?
Immunity to a particular pathogen can be acquired in two fundamentally different
ways - actively, by the person mounting their own response, or passively,
by receiving ready-made antibody - and the distinction matters for vaccination,
for prophylaxis and for the immunoglobulin preparations we sometimes give.
Active immunity is generated when the individuals own immune system is stimulated
by antigen and mounts a response, producing antibody and, crucially,
lasting memory; it arises naturally from infection or artificially from vaccination.
Its advantages are that it is durable, often lifelong,
because of immunological memory, and that it protects against future exposures;
its disadvantage is that it takes days to weeks to develop,
so it does not protect immediately.
Passive immunity, by contrast, is conferred by giving preformed antibody made by
another individual or animal, so the recipient is protected immediately without
mounting their own response.
It occurs naturally when maternal immunoglobulin G crosses the placenta and when
antibody passes in breast milk, protecting the newborn,
and artificially when we administer antibody preparations.
Its advantage is immediate protection; its disadvantage is that it is temporary,
lasting only weeks to months until the given antibody is catabolised,
and it confers no memory.
Immunoglobulin therapy is the clinical use of passive immunity:
pooled human immunoglobulin for replacement in antibody deficiency or as
immunomodulation in high dose, and specific immunoglobulins - such as those against
tetanus, hepatitis B, rabies or the rhesus D antigen - given for immediate
post-exposure protection.
So active immunity is the persons own memory-bearing,
durable response from infection or vaccination,
while passive immunity is immediate but temporary protection from preformed
antibody, the basis of maternal protection and of the immunoglobulin preparations
we give for replacement and post-exposure prophylaxis.
What is the immune role of the spleen, and what are the implications of asplenia?
The spleen is an important secondary lymphoid organ with distinctive immune
functions, and its loss or impairment leaves a characteristic and dangerous
susceptibility to infection that the anaesthetist and perioperative physician must
recognise and guard against.
The spleen has two functionally distinct regions.
The red pulp filters the blood, removing aged and abnormal red cells and,
importantly, clearing blood-borne micro-organisms,
particularly encapsulated bacteria that are difficult for other mechanisms to deal
with.
The white pulp is lymphoid tissue where immune responses to blood-borne antigens
are mounted, and the spleen is a major site of antibody production and of the
clearance of antibody-coated cells.
It also removes particulate matter and is a reservoir of platelets and,
in some species, red cells.
The consequence of these functions is that the asplenic or hyposplenic patient -
whether after surgical splenectomy, from trauma,
or from functional asplenia as in sickle-cell disease - is at lifelong risk of
overwhelming, rapidly fatal sepsis,
particularly from encapsulated organisms such as the pneumococcus,
the meningococcus and Haemophilus, because the filtration and antibody response to
these organisms is impaired.
This risk is mitigated by vaccination against these encapsulated organisms,
ideally before elective splenectomy, by antibiotic prophylaxis,
and by prompt treatment of febrile illness.
So the spleen filters blood-borne organisms, especially encapsulated bacteria,
and mounts antibody responses, so that asplenia confers a lifelong risk of
overwhelming sepsis from encapsulated organisms, managed by vaccination,
antibiotic prophylaxis and vigilant early treatment of infection.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Immunity has a rapid, non-specific innate arm (barriers, phagocytes,
complement, inflammation, pattern-recognition of PAMPs and DAMPs) and a slower,
antigen-specific adaptive arm (T cells, B cells and antibody) with memory;
the two are interdependent.
Second, We routinely breach the innate barriers with lines, tubes and incisions,
so asepsis and infection prevention are fundamental;
surgery and critical illness drive a biphasic pro-inflammatory then
immunosuppressed response.
Third, Anaphylaxis is the acute immunological emergency:
massive mediator release causing hypotension, bronchospasm and angioedema,
presenting under anaesthesia as sudden hypotension and high airway pressures,
treated immediately with adrenaline, oxygen and fluids,
with tryptase and later allergy testing.
Fourth, The leading perioperative anaphylaxis triggers are neuromuscular blockers,
antibiotics (beta-lactams) and chlorhexidine, with latex and others;
identifying the culprit by tryptase and specialist testing is mandatory to prevent
re-exposure.
Fifth, Know the immunocompromised (HIV,
transplant immunosuppression - continue perioperatively,
watch toxicity and infection), autoimmune disease (myasthenia altering relaxant
response, rheumatoid airway and spine),
and sepsis as a dysregulated immune response managed by source control,
antibiotics and resuscitation.
Thank you. That concludes the station.